# Complete and Functional Observability of Nonlinear Systems
Codes for analysis of the complete and functional observability of nonlinear systems, based on symbolic computation of Lie derivatives. Complete observability establishes a sufficient condition for the reconstruction of the full-state vector `x(t)` of a nonlinear system `f(x)` from a measurement function `h(x)`. Functional observability, a generalization of complete observability, establishes a sufficient condition for the reconstruction of a nonlinear functional `g(x)` of a nonlinear system `f(x)` from a measurement function `h(x)`. See the references below for more details.

# License

This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 3 of the License, or (at your option) any later version.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. See the GNU General Public License for more details.

The full text of the GNU General Public License can be found in the file "LICENSE.txt".


# Usage

- `nonlinearobsvmatrix.m` : Computes the observability matrix of a nonlinear system `f(x)` with a measurement function `h(x)` based on symbolic computations of the Lie derivatives of `f(x)` with respect to `h(x)`.

- `example_chaoticsys.m` : Complete and functional observability analysis of several chaotic systems (Lorenz, Cord, Hindmarsh-Rose neuron, and Rossler; ODEs available in the folder `systems`).

- `seizure` : This folder contains example codes for the functional observability analysis of the Epileptor model and the use of the time-series-based index SVDO for early-warning alert of seizure-like events in synthetic data (generated by the Epileptor model, see `example_epileptor.m`) and empirical data (human EEG data, see `example_eegdata.m`).



# References
1.  A. N. Montanari, L. Freitas, D. Proverbio, J. Gonçalves. Functional observability and subspace reconstruction in nonlinear systems. (2022)
2.  A. N. Montanari, L. A. Aguirre. Observability of Network Systems: A Critical Review of Recent Results. *Journal of Control, Automation and Electrical Systems*, **31**(6):1348–1374 (2020). DOI: 10.1007/s40313-020-00633-5.
